The Problem

Coding with an AI agent can bring amazing results — or complete chaos.
On a good day, the AI feels like a brilliant pair programmer: it understands context, follows conventions, and speeds up delivery.
On a bad day, it rewrites logic, ignores patterns, and creates more cleanup work than value.

The latest IDEs — like Cursor, VS Code with Copilot, and JetBrains AI — now let you customize how the AI behaves. Cursor offers rules, commands, and even tools that let you teach the AI your way of working. Copilot Labs is experimenting with prompts and project-level hints.

It’s powerful — but also inconsistent and ad-hoc. Each IDE does it differently, and without structure, AI behavior becomes hard to reason about, impossible to share, and increasingly fragmented across teams.

Left unchecked, this creates drift and inconsistency, exactly the opposite of what AI should bring.

But here’s the opportunity: we can use these same mechanisms to promote consistency, reinforce great practices, and create an AI-enhanced developer experience that truly accelerates human productivity.

Augmented Team said:
The Goal

Give the AI consistent, context-aware behavior — without losing structure, ownership, or clarity.

It should also be evolving and scalable: able to grow from one developer to a full team or large organization, carrying forward shared principles and best practices.

The goal isn’t just to make the AI “follow rules,” but to embed craftsmanship at scale — injecting good habits, reducing AI churn, and creating a living system that continuously improves how humans and AI build together.


The Goal

Give the AI consistent, context-aware behavior — without losing structure, ownership, or clarity.

It should also be evolving and scalable: able to grow from one developer to a full team or large organization, carrying forward shared principles and best practices.

The goal isn’t just to make the AI “follow rules,” but to embed craftsmanship at scale — injecting good habits, reducing AI churn, and creating a living system that continuously improves how humans and AI build together.



The Pattern: Treat Each AI Behavior as a Feature

Each AI behavior, if you think about it, can be modeled as a distinct feature.
It can be defined, developed, tested, and iterated just like any product feature we deliver to users — only this time, the “user” is the AI itself.

In the old days, this kind of environment tinkering felt like overkill — too much setup for too little gain. Now, with AI helping us build and refine its own behaviors, it’s fast, practical, and worth doing. Nodenr IDES give us a bunch of easy hooks to do this (think VS Code agent instructions, and prompt libraries, or Cursor rules, commands, and code-backed automations)

This pattern gives you fine grained control of your AI, way from churn and frustration, and towards injecting practices and consistency based on context. We do this by making the guidance we give our AI buddy, modular, versioned, and composable. We make this guidance portable and auditable, all essential for high-quality outcomes as AI becomes a real part of the development team.


Benefits of the Pattern

Modular — each behavior is independent, with clear purpose and boundaries.

Versioned — stored in git, evolving alongside the features it supports.

Composable — behaviors can depend on or extend each other.

Portable — deploy behaviors individually to any IDE or environment.

Auditable — see exactly what guidance the AI is acting on.

How to Apply the Pattern

Define a Behavior as a Feature

Treat it as a product feature: design, code, document, test.

Manage it through normal versioning and branching.

Localize Everything

Keep all AI-related instructions, prompts, tools, and configs together.

Store them in features/<feature>/cursor/.

Support with Tests

Write validation commands or tests to confirm behavior consistency.

Deploy Selectively

Sync or publish behaviors to IDE environments on a behavior-by-behavior basis.

Makes it easy to share, test, and iterate safely.

Example: Cursor Implementation

Cursor provides three key mechanisms:

Rules (*.mdc) – define how the AI should think and act.

Commands (*-cmd.md) – executable workflows that guide its actions.

Functions (*_cmd.py) – code-level automations for repetitive or complex tasks.

Let’s use these to implement the meta behavior that manages AI behaviors themselves — a “Behavior Management” feature.

features/behavior-management/cursor/
  ├── behavior-pattern-rule.mdc       # Defines how behaviors should be structured
  ├── behavior-sync-cmd.md            # Describes how to deploy and sync behaviors
  ├── behavior-sync_cmd.py            # Automates syncing behaviors to .cursor/
  ├── behavior-naming-guidelines.mdc  # Rules for consistent naming and references
  └── behavior-testing-guidelines.mdc # Rules for validating behavior consistency

Example Snippets

Rule (behavior-pattern-rule.mdc)

Define each AI behavior as a self-contained feature with its own rules, commands, and tools.
Ensure every behavior has clear ownership and versioning within the repo.

Command (behavior-sync-cmd.md)

Syncs all feature-local AI behaviors into the global .cursor/ environment.
Supports selective deployment via @sync <feature> syntax.

Function (behavior-sync_cmd.py)

def sync_behaviors(feature=None):
    # Scan features for cursor/ folders
    # Copy rules and commands into .cursor/ environment
    # Track synced behaviors in index

Why the Sync Command Matters

The sync command is the heart of the pattern — it bridges feature-local definitions and the global AI runtime.
It ensures that the AI always acts on current, intentional behavior definitions — not outdated or orphaned files.

Beyond Syncing

Other important aspects of the feature include:

Naming conventions for files and commands (<feature>-<type>)

Indexing to track active behaviors

Cross-references between related rules and commands

Versioned documentation that evolves with the codebase

Together, these make the IDE AI Behavior Feature Pattern a repeatable system for designing, managing, and scaling intelligent developer experiences.








